
**Dividing into phrases**

Take the sentence 
"Despite losing their pre-quarterfinal matches at the ITTF World Table Tennis Team Championship in Busan on Wednesday, both the Indian men's and women's teams will qualify for the first time ever by taking the last world ranking spot"
Let us mark each phrase in brackets.

\[ \begin{sentence}
\{ \begin{subordinate clause}
(*Despite*)
(*losing*) 
(*their pre-quarterfinal matches*) 
(*at the ITTF World Table Tennis Team Championships*) 
(*in Busan*) 
(*on Wednesday,*)
\} \end{subordinate clause}
\{ \begin{main clause}
(*both the Indian men's and women's teams*) 
(*will qualify*) 
(*for the Olympics*) 
(*for the first time ever*)
\} \end{main clause}
\{ \begin{subordinate clause}
(*by taking the last world ranking spot.*)
\{ \end{subordinate clause}
\] \end{sentence}


*Despite losing their pre-quarterfinal matches*
-> concessive clause
-> subject is not overtly mentioned here, it is 'they'


All clauses have (conjugated) verbs, except in cases like copula deletion and interjections.
**Independent Clauses**
1. **Coördinate Clauses** 
One of a series of two or more syntactically independent clauses.
Ex.
\[{I eat} and {he sees oil.}\]
In English, it is considered generally that the first clause is the main clause and the second one is the conjoined clause, including the connector/ coördinating conjunction.
In Indian languages, it may be preferred to take the second clause as the main clause.

2. **Correlative Clauses** 
One of a series of clauses using correlative conjunctions
Ex.
\[{Either I stay} {or he does} {or she does}\]
\[{Neither will you smoke} {nor will I drink} {nor will they sin.}\]

In English, it is usually obvious which clause has the main correlative conjunction and the other clause is conjoined including the correlative conjunction.

3. **Complement Clauses**
Plays the role of an object in another clause.

Ex.
\[{He said {that she said {that I drink water.}}}\]

In English, the complementizing pronoun 'that' is a part of the complement clause.

**Dependent Clauses**
1. **Relative Clauses**
Provides additional information on a noun in another clause.
Ex. 
\[{He saw the book {that they had written.}}\]
\[{I will tell that man {who is wearing a red cloak.}}\]

2. **Adverbial Clause**
Provides additional adverbial information in another clause.

Ex. 
\[{I cried} {while she smiled.}\] (time)
\[{I would have won} {if he had not given her the answer.}\] (condition)
\[{She bought a bouquet of flowers,} {since it was her birthday.}\] (reason)
\[{Although she didn't have any money,} {the worker gave her all the food.}\] (concession)







Consider the sentence now
Sift the dry ingredients first into a large bowl to get rid of any hard lumps caused during storage, while getting more air into the mixture.


\[
{
(Sift the dry ingredients first)
(into a large bowl) 
(to get rid of any hard lumps)
(caused during storage,)
(while getting more air into the mixture.)
}
\]


**Sentence Composition**
Simple
Compound
Complex
Compound-Complex


**Summarization**
Abstractive
Understand and give the most important essence of the text.

Extractive
Pick out the words and sentences from the original text

Pleonastic Pronouns